[book] Add Sinsemilla gadget description (#82)
zcash/orchard: book/src/design/circuit/gadgets/sinsemilla.md

>
> The running sum only applies to message words within a single field element, i.e. if $n \geq \mathtt{PrimeField::NUM\_BITS}$ then we will have several disjoint running sums. A longer message can be constructed by splitting the message words across several field elements, and then running several instances of the constraints below. Copy constraints are needed from each output to the next input in order to continue the Sinsemilla accumulation, even though the running sums restart.

Rearranging gives us an expression for each word of the original message $m_{i+1} = z_{i} - 2^k \cdot z_{i + 1}$, which we can look up in the table.

In other words, $z_{n-i} = \sum\limits_{h=0}^{i-1} 2^{kh} \cdot m_{h+1}$.

### Layout

Note: $q_{S3}$ is synthesized from $q_{S1}$ and $q_{S2}$; it is shown here only for clarity.

$$
\begin{array}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|}
\hline
\text{Step} &    x_A     &   bits    &    \lambda_1     &   \lambda_2      &    x_P       & q_{S1} & q_{S2} & q_{S3} & fixed\_y_Q  &table_{idx}&    table_x     &    table_y      \\\hline

>     0       & x_Q        &   z_0     & \lambda_{1,0}    & \lambda_{2,0}    & x_{P[m_1]}   & 1      & 1      & 0      &   y_Q      &    0      & x_{P[0]}       & y_{P[0]}        \\\hline

Reviewer: x<sub>Q</sub> would be copied in from a fixed cell.

>     0       & x_Q        &   z_0     & \lambda_{1,0}    & \lambda_{2,0}    & x_{P[m_1]}   & 1      & 1      & 0      &   y_Q      &    0      & x_{P[0]}       & y_{P[0]}        \\\hline

Reviewer: I added a sentence about this.

\text{For } i \in [0, n), \text{ let} &x_{R,i} &=& \lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i} \\
                                      &Y_{A,i} &=& (\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{R,i}) \\
                                      &y_{P,i} &=& Y_{A,i}/2 - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}) \\
                                      &m_{i+1} &=& z_{i} - 2^k \cdot q_{S2,i} \cdot z_{i+1} \\
                                      &q_{S3}  &=& q_{S2} \cdot (q_{S2} - 1)
\end{array}$

The Halo 2 circuit API can automatically substitute $y_{P,i}$, $x_{R,i}$, $y_{A,i}$, and $y_{A,i+1}$, so we don't need to do that manually.

- $x_{A,0} = x_Q$
- $2 \cdot y_Q = Y_{A,0}$
- for $i$ from $0$ up to $n-1$:
  - $(m_{i+1},\, x_{P,i},\, y_{P,i}) \in \mathcal{P}$
  - $\lambda_{2,i}^2 = x_{A,i+1} + x_{R,i} + x_{A,i}$
  - $4 \cdot \lambda_{2,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{A,i+1}) = 2 \cdot Y_{A,i} + (2 - q_{S3}) \cdot Y_{A,i+1} + 2 q_{S3} \cdot y_{A,n}$

Note that each term of the last constraint is multiplied by $4$ relative to the constraint program given earlier. This is a small optimization that avoids divisions by $2$.

$$
\begin{array}{|c|l|}
\hline
\text{Degree} & \text{Constraint} \\\hline

> 4   & fixed\rule{0.4em}{0.02ex}y_Q \cdot (2 \cdot fixed\rule{0.4em}{0.02ex}y_Q - Y_{A,0}) = 0 \\\hline

Reviewer: For some reason the `_` in `fixed_y` causes a rendering error in mdbook, whether escaped as `\_` or not; hence the `\rule` workaround.

  \vdots    & \vdots     & \vdots      & \vdots   & \vdots           & \vdots           & 1      & 1      & 0      &     0      & \vdots      & \vdots   & \vdots   \\\hline
   n-1'     & x'_{A,n-1} & x_{P[m'_n]} & z'_{n-1} & \lambda'_{1,n-1} & \lambda'_{2,n-1} & 1      & 2      & 2      &     0      & \vdots      & \vdots   & \vdots   \\\hline
    n'      & x'_{A,n}   &             &          & y_{A,n}          &                  & 0      & 0      & 0      &     0      & \vdots      & \vdots   & \vdots   \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

$x_Q$, $z_0$, $z'_0$, etc. would be copied in using equality constraints.

### Optimized Sinsemilla gate

$\begin{array}{lrcl}
\text{For } i \in [0, n), \text{ let} &x_{R,i} &=& \lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i} \\
                                      &Y_{A,i} &=& (\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{R,i}) \\
                                      &y_{P,i} &=& Y_{A,i}/2 - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}) \\
                                      &m_{i+1} &=& z_{i} - 2^k \cdot (q_{S2,i} - q_{S3,i}) \cdot z_{i+1} \\

>                                       &q_{S3}  &=& q_{S2} \cdot (q_{S2} - 1)

Reviewer 2: I checked these. It's a neat trick, which I believe corresponds to a selector combining optimization (https://github.com/zcash/halo2/issues/116). Writing it out below for my own benefit.

We need two properties:
- At the end of every piece, z<sub>n-1</sub> is constrained to 10 bits, forcing z<sub>n</sub> to be zero without needing a cell.
- At the end of the last piece, we want to alter the y<sub>A,i+1</sub> constraint to constrain an output cell with y<sub>A,n</sub> instead of the next row's Sinsemilla cells.

To achieve both of these in a single selector, we define q<sub>S3</sub> in terms of q<sub>S2</sub> to get the following tri-state toggle:

| q<sub>S2</sub> |  q<sub>S3</sub> | q<sub>S2</sub> -  q<sub>S3</sub> | Piece | Position |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | 0 | 0 | Earlier | End |
| 1 | 0 | 1 | Earlier | Within |
| 2 | 2 | 0 | Last | End |

We can now set q<sub>S2</sub> to one of three states, and use q<sub>S2</sub> -  q<sub>S3</sub> to toggle the end-of-piece behaviour, while q<sub>S3</sub> toggles the last-piece behaviour.

Reviewer: Exactly right. It's basically interpolating over the values of q<sub>S2</sub>, which is also what you would do for zcash/halo2#116.

Sinsemilla is roughly 4 times less efficient than the algebraic hashes Rescue and Poseidon inside a circuit, but around 19 times more efficient than Rescue outside a circuit. Unlike either of these hashes, the collision resistance property of Sinsemilla can be proven based on cryptographic assumptions that have been well-established for at least 20 years. Sinsemilla can also be used as a computationally binding and perfectly hiding commitment scheme.

The general approach is to split the message into $k$-bit pieces, and for each piece, select from a table of $2^k$ bases in our cryptographic group. We combine the selected bases using a double-and-add algorithm. This ends up being provably as secure as a vector Pedersen hash, and makes advantageous use of the lookup facility supported by Halo 2.

## Specification
Let $\mathbb{G}$ be a cryptographic group of prime order $q$. We write $\mathbb{G}$ additively, with identity $\mathcal{O}$, and using $[m] P$ for scalar multiplication of $P$ by $m$.

> Let $k \geq 1$ be an integer chosen based on efficiency considerations (the table size will be $2^k$). Let $n$ be a **fixed** integer such that messages are $kn$ bits, where $2^n \leq \frac{q-1}{2}$. Message padding is out of scope for this note.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let $k \geq 1$ be an integer chosen based on efficiency considerations (the table size will be $2^k$). Let $n$ be a **fixed** integer such that messages are $kn$ bits, where $2^n \leq \frac{q-1}{2}$. We use zero-padding to the next multiple of $k$ bits if necessary.
```

$\textsf{Setup}$: Choose $Q$ and $P[0..2^k - 1]$ as $2^k + 1$ independent, verifiably random generators of $\mathbb{G}$, using a suitable hash into $\mathbb{G}$, such that none of $Q$ or $P[0..2^k - 1]$ are $\mathcal{O}$.

$\textsf{Hash}(M)$:
    Split $M$ into $n$ groups of $k$ bits. Interpret each group as a $k$-bit little-endian integer $m_i$.
    $A_0 := Q$
    for $i$ from $1$ up to $n$:
        $A_{i+1} := [2] A_i + P[m_i] = (A_i + P[m_i]) + A_i$
    return $A_{n+1}$

> If $\mathbb{G}$ is a prime-order elliptic curve in short Weierstrass form, then let $\textsf{ShortHash}(M)$ be the $x\text{-coordinate}$ of $\textsf{Hash}(M)$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let $\textsf{ShortHash}(M)$ be the $x\text{-coordinate}$ of $\textsf{Hash}(M)$. (This assumes that mathbb{G}$ is a prime-order elliptic curve in short Weierstrass form, as is the case for Pallas and Vesta.)
```

### Use as a commitment scheme
Choose another generator $H$ independently of $Q$ and $P[0..2^k - 1]$.

The randomness $r$ for a commitment is chosen uniformly on $[0, q)$.

Let $\textsf{Commit}_r(M) = \textsf{Hash}(M) + [r] H$.

> If $\mathbb{G}$ is a prime-order elliptic curve in short Weierstrass form, then let $\textsf{ShortCommit}_r(M)$ be the $x\text{-coordinate}$ of $\textsf{Commit}_r(M)$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let $\textsf{ShortCommit}_r(M)$ be the $x\text{-coordinate}$ of $\textsf{Commit}_r(M)$. (This again assumes that $\mathbb{G}$ is a prime-order elliptic curve in short Weierstrass form.)
```

    &(m_i,\, x_{P,i},\, \frac{(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))}{2} - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i})) \in \mathcal{P} \\
    &\lambda_{2,i}^2 = x_{A,i+1} + (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}) + x_{A,i} \\
    &\textsf{if } i < n: \\
        &\hspace{2em} 2 \cdot \lambda_{2,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{A,i+1}) =\\
        &\hspace{2em}(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))\, +\\
        &\hspace{2em}(\lambda_{1,i+1} + \lambda_{2,i+1}) \cdot (x_{A,i+1} - (\lambda_{1,i+1}^2 - x_{A,i+1} - x_{P,i+1}))\\
\end{aligned}
$$

$\lambda_{2,n} \cdot (x_{A,n} - x_{A,n+1}) = (\lambda_{1,n} + \lambda_{2,n}) \cdot (x_{A,n} - (\lambda_{1,n}^2 - x_{A,n} - x_{P,n})) + y_{A,n+1}$

## PLONK / Halo 2 constraints

### Message decomposition
We have an $n$-bit message $m = m_1 + 2^k m_2 + ... + 2^{k\cdot (n-1)} m_n$. (Note that the message words are 1-indexed as in the protocol spec: https://zips.z.cash/protocol/nu5.pdf#concretesinsemillahash)

Initialise the running sum $z_0 = \alpha$ and define $z_{i + 1} := \frac{z_{i} - m_{i+1}}{2^K}$. We will end up with $z_n = 0.$

> Rearranging gives us an expression for each word the original message $m_{i+1} = z_{i} - 2^k \cdot z_{i + 1}$, which we can look up in the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rearranging gives us an expression for each word of the original message $m_{i+1} = z_{i} - 2^k \cdot z_{i + 1}$, which we can look up in the table.
```

            & x_{A,n+1} &   z_n     &                 &                 &              &                &                 &   \vdots   & \vdots         & \vdots          \\\hline
  \vdots    &           &           &                 &                 &              &                &                 &  2^k - 1   & x_{P[2^k - 1]} & y_{P[2^k - 1]}  \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

### Specification of Sinsemilla gate:
$$
\begin{array}{|c|l|}
\hline
\text{Degree} & \text{Constraint} \\\hline
3   & q_{Sinsemilla,i} \cdot \left(\lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}) - y_{A,i} + y_{P,i}\right) = 0 \\\hline
4   & q_{Sinsemilla,i} \cdot \left((\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i})) - 2 y_{A,i}\right) = 0 \\\hline
3   & q_{Sinsemilla,i} \cdot \left(\lambda_{2,i}^2 - x_{A,i+1} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}) - x_{A,i}\right) = 0 \\\hline
3   & q_{Sinsemilla,i} \cdot \left(\lambda_{2,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{A,i+1}) - y_{A,i} - y_{A,i+1}\right) = 0 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

Optimized:

$$
\begin{array}{|c|l|}
\hline
\text{Degree} & \text{Constraint} \\\hline

> 4?   & q_{Sinsemilla1} \Rightarrow (z_{i} - 2^k \cdot z_{i+1},\, x_{P,i},\, \frac{(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))}{2} - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i})) \in \mathcal{P} \\\hline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6*   & q_{Sinsemilla1} \Rightarrow (z_{i} - 2^k \cdot z_{i+1},\, x_{P,i},\, \frac{(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))}{2} - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i})) \in \mathcal{P} \\\hline
```

3   & q_{Sinsemilla1,i} \cdot (\lambda_{2,i}^2 - (x_{A,i+1} + (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}) + x_{A,i})) \\\hline
5   & q_{Sinsemilla2,i} \cdot \left(\lambda_{2,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{A,i+1}) - y_{A,i} - y_{A,i+1}\right) = 0 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$
where
$$
\begin{aligned}
y_{A,i} &= (\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}),\\
y_{A,i+1} &= (\lambda_{1,i+1} + \lambda_{2,i+1}) \cdot (x_{A,i+1} - (\lambda_{1,i+1}^2 - x_{A,i+1} - x_{P,i+1})
\end{aligned}
$$

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

* The degree of a lookup gate is 3 + the degree of the polynomial expression being looked up (after tuple compression). TODO check this.
```

A further optimization is to toggle the lookup expression on $q_{Sinsemilla1}.$ This removes the need to fill in unused cells with dummy values to pass the lookup argument. The optimized lookup argument would be:

$$
\begin{array}{}
&(\\&
&& q_S \cdot (z_{i} - 2^k \cdot z_{i+1}) + (1 - q_S) \cdot 0, \\
&&& q_S \cdot x_{P, i} + (1 - q_S) \cdot x_{P, 0}, \\

> &&& q_S \cdot y_p + (1 - q_S) \cdot y_{P, 0} \\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
&&& q_S \cdot y_{P, i} + (1 - q_S) \cdot y_{P, 0} \\
```

&),&
\end{array}
$$

> where $y_{P,i} \equiv \frac{(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))}{2} - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}).$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $y_{P,i} \equiv \frac{(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))}{2} - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}).$

This increases the degree of the lookup gate to 7. TODO: check.
```

Let $k \geq 1$ be an integer chosen based on efficiency considerations (the table size will be $2^k$). Let $n$ be a **fixed** integer such that messages are $kn$ bits, where $2^n \leq \frac{q-1}{2}$. We use zero-padding to the next multiple of $k$ bits if necessary.

$\textsf{Setup}$: Choose $Q$ and $P[0..2^k - 1]$ as $2^k + 1$ independent, verifiably random generators of $\mathbb{G}$, using a suitable hash into $\mathbb{G}$, such that none of $Q$ or $P[0..2^k - 1]$ are $\mathcal{O}$.

$\textsf{Hash}(M)$:
    Split $M$ into $n$ groups of $k$ bits. Interpret each group as a $k$-bit little-endian integer $m_i$.
    $A_0 := Q$
    for $i$ from $1$ up to $n$:
        $A_{i+1} := [2] A_i + P[m_i] = (A_i + P[m_i]) + A_i$
    return $A_{n+1}$

Let $\textsf{ShortHash}(M)$ be the $x$-coordinate of $\textsf{Hash}(M)$. (This assumes that $\mathbb{G}$ is a prime-order elliptic curve in short Weierstrass form, as is the case for Pallas and Vesta.)

### Use as a commitment scheme
Choose another generator $H$ independently of $Q$ and $P[0..2^k - 1]$.

The randomness $r$ for a commitment is chosen uniformly on $[0, q)$.

> Let $\textsf{Commit}_r(M) = \textsf{Hash}(M) + [r] H$.

Author: ```suggestion
Let $\textsf{Commit}_r(M) = \textsf{Hash}(M) ⸭ [r] H$.
```

Let $\textsf{ShortCommit}_r(M)$ be the $x\text{-coordinate}$ of $\textsf{Commit}_r(M)$. (This again assumes that $\mathbb{G}$ is a prime-order elliptic curve in short Weierstrass form.)

Note that unlike a simple Pedersen commitment, this commitment scheme ($\textsf{Commit}$ or $\textsf{ShortCommit}$) is not additively homomorphic.

## Efficient implementation
The aim of the design is to optimize the number of bits that can be processed for each step of the algorithm (which requires a doubling and addition in $\mathbb{G}$) for a given table size. Using a single table of size $2^k$ group elements, we can process $k$ bits at a time.

> Note that it is slightly more efficient to express a double-and-add $[2] A + R$ as $(A + R) + A$. We will show in the security argument section below that in the case where $\mathbb{G}$ is a prime-order short Weierstrass elliptic curve, provided a negligible probability of failure is acceptable, it suffices to use incomplete additions.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that it is slightly more efficient to express a double-and-add $[2] A + R$ as $(A + R) + A$. It is shown in the [protocol spec security argument](https://zips.z.cash/protocol/protocol.pdf#sinsemillasecurity) that in the case where $\mathbb{G}$ is a prime-order short Weierstrass elliptic curve, provided a negligible probability of failure is acceptable, it suffices to use incomplete additions.
```

The security properties of Sinsemilla are similar to Pedersen hashes; it is **not** designed to be used where a random oracle, PRF, or preimage-resistant hash is required. **The only claimed security property of the hash function is collision-resistance for fixed-length inputs.**

Sinsemilla is roughly 4 times less efficient than the algebraic hashes Rescue and Poseidon inside a circuit, but around 19 times more efficient than Rescue outside a circuit. Unlike either of these hashes, the collision resistance property of Sinsemilla can be proven based on cryptographic assumptions that have been well-established for at least 20 years. Sinsemilla can also be used as a computationally binding and perfectly hiding commitment scheme.

The general approach is to split the message into $k$-bit pieces, and for each piece, select from a table of $2^k$ bases in our cryptographic group. We combine the selected bases using a double-and-add algorithm. This ends up being provably as secure as a vector Pedersen hash, and makes advantageous use of the lookup facility supported by Halo 2.

> ## Specification

Author: ```suggestion
## Specification

This section is an outline of how Sinsemilla works: for the normative specification, refer to [§5.4.1.9 Sinsemilla Hash Function](https://zips.z.cash/protocol/protocol.pdf#concretesinsemillahash) in the protocol spec.
```

Let $\mathbb{G}$ be a cryptographic group of prime order $q$. We write $\mathbb{G}$ additively, with identity $\mathcal{O}$, and using $[m] P$ for scalar multiplication of $P$ by $m$.

Let $k \geq 1$ be an integer chosen based on efficiency considerations (the table size will be $2^k$). Let $n$ be a **fixed** integer such that messages are $kn$ bits, where $2^n \leq \frac{q-1}{2}$. We use zero-padding to the next multiple of $k$ bits if necessary.

$\textsf{Setup}$: Choose $Q$ and $P[0..2^k - 1]$ as $2^k + 1$ independent, verifiably random generators of $\mathbb{G}$, using a suitable hash into $\mathbb{G}$, such that none of $Q$ or $P[0..2^k - 1]$ are $\mathcal{O}$.

$\textsf{Hash}(M)$:
- Split $M$ into $n$ groups of $k$ bits. Interpret each group as a $k$-bit little-endian integer $m_i$.
- $A_1 := Q$
- for $i$ from $1$ up to $n$:

>   - $A_{i+1} := [2] A_i + P[m_i] = (A_i + P[m_i]) + A_i$

Author: ```suggestion
  - $A_{i+1} := [2] A_i ⸭ P[m_i] = (A_i ⸭ P[m_i]) ⸭ A_i$
```

The security properties of Sinsemilla are similar to Pedersen hashes; it is **not** designed to be used where a random oracle, PRF, or preimage-resistant hash is required. **The only claimed security property of the hash function is collision-resistance for fixed-length inputs.**

Sinsemilla is roughly 4 times less efficient than the algebraic hashes Rescue and Poseidon inside a circuit, but around 19 times more efficient than Rescue outside a circuit. Unlike either of these hashes, the collision resistance property of Sinsemilla can be proven based on cryptographic assumptions that have been well-established for at least 20 years. Sinsemilla can also be used as a computationally binding and perfectly hiding commitment scheme.

The general approach is to split the message into $k$-bit pieces, and for each piece, select from a table of $2^k$ bases in our cryptographic group. We combine the selected bases using a double-and-add algorithm. This ends up being provably as secure as a vector Pedersen hash, and makes advantageous use of the lookup facility supported by Halo 2.

> ## Specification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Description
```

> This section is an outline of how Sinsemilla works: for the normative specification, refer to [§5.4.1.9 Sinsemilla Hash Function](https://zips.z.cash/protocol/protocol.pdf#concretesinsemillahash) in the protocol spec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section is an outline of how Sinsemilla works: for the normative specification, refer to [§5.4.1.9 Sinsemilla Hash Function](https://zips.z.cash/protocol/protocol.pdf#concretesinsemillahash) in the protocol spec. The incomplete point addition operator, ⸭, that we use below is also defined there.
```

Let $\mathbb{G}$ be a cryptographic group of prime order $q$. We write $\mathbb{G}$ additively, with identity $\mathcal{O}$, and using $[m] P$ for scalar multiplication of $P$ by $m$.

> Let $k \geq 1$ be an integer chosen based on efficiency considerations (the table size will be $2^k$). Let $n$ be a **fixed** integer such that messages are $kn$ bits, where $2^n \leq \frac{q-1}{2}$. We use zero-padding to the next multiple of $k$ bits if necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let $k \geq 1$ be an integer chosen based on efficiency considerations (the table size will be $2^k$). Let $n$ be an integer, fixed for each instantiation, such that messages are $kn$ bits, where $2^n \leq \frac{q-1}{2}$. We use zero-padding to the next multiple of $k$ bits if necessary.
```

> $\textsf{Setup}$: Choose $Q$ and $P[0..2^k - 1]$ as $2^k + 1$ independent, verifiably random generators of $\mathbb{G}$, using a suitable hash into $\mathbb{G}$, such that none of $Q$ or $P[0..2^k - 1]$ are $\mathcal{O}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$\textsf{Setup}$: Choose $Q$ and $S[0..2^k - 1]$ as $2^k + 1$ independent, verifiably random generators of $\mathbb{G}$, using a suitable hash into $\mathbb{G}$, such that none of $Q$ or $S[0..2^k - 1]$ are $\mathcal{O}$.
```
to follow the spec.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> In Orchard, we define $Q$ to be dependent on a domain separator. The protocol specification uses $\mathcal{Q}(D)$ in place of $Q$ and $\mathcal{S}(m)$ in place of $P[m]$.
```

$\textsf{Hash}(M)$:
- Split $M$ into $n$ groups of $k$ bits. Interpret each group as a $k$-bit little-endian integer $m_i$.

> - $A_1 := Q$
> - for $i$ from $1$ up to $n$:
>   - $A_{i+1} := [2] A_i ⸭ P[m_i] = (A_i ⸭ P[m_i]) ⸭ A_i$
> - return $A_{n+1}$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- let $A_0 := Q$
- for $i$ from $1$ up to $n$:
  - let $A_i := (A_{i-1} \;⸭\; S[m_i]) \;⸭\; A_{i-1}$
- return $A_n$

where ⸭ denotes incomplete point addition as defined in [Section 5.4.1.9 of the protocol specification](https://zips.z.cash/protocol/protocol.pdf#concretesinsemillahash).
```
The non-cosmetic changes here are:
* make the indexing match [Theorem 5.4.4 in the protocol spec](https://zips.z.cash/protocol/protocol.pdf#thmsinsemillaex);
* rename P to S to more closely follow the spec;
* delete [2] A_{i-1} ⸭ S[m_i], because this is *not* equivalent to (A_{i-1} ⸭ S[m_i]) ⸭ A_{i-1} in exceptional cases;
* define ⸭.

Let $\textsf{ShortHash}(M)$ be the $x$-coordinate of $\textsf{Hash}(M)$. (This assumes that $\mathbb{G}$ is a prime-order elliptic curve in short Weierstrass form, as is the case for Pallas and Vesta.)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> For efficiency we use incomplete addition in the above algorithm, because we are able to prove ([Theorem 5.4.4](https://zips.z.cash/protocol/protocol.pdf#thmsinsemillaex) in the protocol specification) that an exceptional case for addition would lead to finding a discrete logarithm, which can be assumed to occur with negligible probability even for adversarial input.

```

### Use as a commitment scheme

> Choose another generator $H$ independently of $Q$ and $P[0..2^k - 1]$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choose another generator $H$ independently of $Q$ and $S[0..2^k - 1]$.
```

The randomness $r$ for a commitment is chosen uniformly on $[0, q)$.

Let $\textsf{Commit}_r(M) = \textsf{Hash}(M) ⸭ [r] H$.

Let $\textsf{ShortCommit}_r(M)$ be the $x\text{-coordinate}$ of $\textsf{Commit}_r(M)$. (This again assumes that $\mathbb{G}$ is a prime-order elliptic curve in short Weierstrass form.)

Note that unlike a simple Pedersen commitment, this commitment scheme ($\textsf{Commit}$ or $\textsf{ShortCommit}$) is not additively homomorphic.

## Efficient implementation
The aim of the design is to optimize the number of bits that can be processed for each step of the algorithm (which requires a doubling and addition in $\mathbb{G}$) for a given table size. Using a single table of size $2^k$ group elements, we can process $k$ bits at a time.

Note that it is slightly more efficient to express a double-and-add $[2] A + R$ as $(A + R) + A$. It is shown in the [Sinsemilla security argument](https://zips.z.cash/protocol/protocol.pdf#sinsemillasecurity) that in the case where $\mathbb{G}$ is a prime-order short Weierstrass elliptic curve, provided a negligible probability of failure is acceptable, it suffices to use incomplete additions.

## Constraint program

> Let $\mathcal{P} = \left\{(j,\, x_{P[j]},\, y_{P[j]}) \text{ for } j \in \{0..2^k - 1\}\right\}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let $\mathcal{P} = \left\{(j,\, x_{S[j]},\, y_{S[j]}) \text{ for } j \in \{0..2^k - 1\}\right\}$.
```

> Input: $m_i, i \in [1..n]$. (Note that the message words are 1-indexed as in the [protocol spec](https://zips.z.cash/protocol/nu5.pdf#concretesinsemillahash)).
> 
> Output: $(x_{A,n+1},\, y_{A,n+1})$.
> 
> > $(x_{A,1},\, y_{A,1}) = Q$
> >
> > for $i$ from $1$ up to $n$:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Input: $m_{1..n}$. (The message words are 1-indexed here, as in the [protocol spec](https://zips.z.cash/protocol/nu5.pdf#concretesinsemillahash), but we start the loop from $i = 0$ so that $(x_{A,i}, y_{A,i})$ corresponds to $\mathsf{Acc}_i$ in the protocol spec.)

Output: $(x_{A,n},\, y_{A,n})$.

> $(x_{A,0},\, y_{A,0}) = Q$
>
> for $i$ from $0$ up to $n-1$:
```

> $$
\begin{aligned}
    y_{P,i} &= y_{A,i} - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i})\\
    x_{R,i} &= \lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}\\
    2 \cdot y_{A,i} &= (\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{R,i})\\

>     (m_i,\, x_{P,i},\, y_{P,i}) &\in \mathcal{P}\\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    (m_{i+1},\, x_{P,i},\, y_{P,i}) &\in \mathcal{P}\\
```

    \lambda_{2,i}^2 &= x_{A,i+1} + x_{R,i} + x_{A,i}\\
    \lambda_{2,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{A,i+1}) &= y_{A,i} + y_{A,i+1}\\
\end{aligned}
$$

After substitution of $y_{P,i}$, $x_{R,i}$, $y_{A,i}$, and $y_{A,i+1}$, this becomes:

> > $(x_{A,1},\, y_{A,1}) = Q$
> >
> > $2 \cdot y_{A,1} = (\lambda_{1,1} + \lambda_{2,1}) \cdot (x_{A,1} - (\lambda_{1,1}^2 - x_{A,1} - x_{P,1}))$
> >
> > for $i$ from $1$ up to $n$:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> $(x_{A,0},\, y_{A,0}) = Q$
>
> $2 \cdot y_{A,0} = (\lambda_{1,0} + \lambda_{2,0}) \cdot (x_{A,0} - (\lambda_{1,0}^2 - x_{A,0} - x_{P,0}))$
>
> for $i$ from $0$ up to $n-1$:
```

> $$
\begin{aligned}
    &\textsf{// let } y_{P,i} = y_{A,i} - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}) \\
    &\textsf{// let } x_{R,i} = \lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i} \\
    &\textsf{// let } y_{A,i} = \frac{(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))}{2} \\

>     &(m_i,\, x_{P,i},\, \frac{(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))}{2} - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i})) \in \mathcal{P} \\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    &(m_{i+1},\, x_{P,i},\, \frac{(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))}{2} - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i})) \in \mathcal{P} \\
```

    &\lambda_{2,i}^2 = x_{A,i+1} + (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}) + x_{A,i} \\

>     &\textsf{if } i < n: \\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    &\textsf{if } i < n-1: \\
```

        &\hspace{2em} 2 \cdot \lambda_{2,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{A,i+1}) =\\
        &\hspace{2em}(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))\, +\\
        &\hspace{2em}(\lambda_{1,i+1} + \lambda_{2,i+1}) \cdot (x_{A,i+1} - (\lambda_{1,i+1}^2 - x_{A,i+1} - x_{P,i+1}))\\
\end{aligned}
$$
>

> > $\lambda_{2,n} \cdot (x_{A,n} - x_{A,n+1}) = (\lambda_{1,n} + \lambda_{2,n}) \cdot (x_{A,n} - (\lambda_{1,n}^2 - x_{A,n} - x_{P,n})) + y_{A,n+1}$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> $\lambda_{2,n-1} \cdot (x_{A,n-1} - x_{A,n}) = (\lambda_{1,n-1} + \lambda_{2,n-1}) \cdot (x_{A,n-1} - (\lambda_{1,n-1}^2 - x_{A,n-1} - x_{P,n-1})) + y_{A,n}$
```

## PLONK / Halo 2 constraints

### Message decomposition

> We have an $n$-bit message $m = m_1 + 2^k m_2 + ... + 2^{k\cdot (n-1)} m_n$. (Note that the message words are 1-indexed as in the protocol spec: https://zips.z.cash/protocol/nu5.pdf#concretesinsemillahash)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have an $n$-bit message $m = m_1 + 2^k m_2 + ... + 2^{k\cdot (n-1)} m_n$. (Note that the message words are 1-indexed as in the [protocol spec](https://zips.z.cash/protocol/nu5.pdf#concretesinsemillahash).)
```

Initialise the running sum $z_0 = \alpha$ and define $z_{i + 1} := \frac{z_{i} - m_{i+1}}{2^K}$. We will end up with $z_n = 0.$

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> The running sum here only applies to message words within a single field element, i.e. if $n \geq \mathtt{PrimeField::NUM_BITS}$ then we will have several disjoint running sums. A longer message can be constructed by splitting the message words across several field elements, and then running several instances of the constraints below. Copy constraints are needed from each output to the next input in order to continue the Sinsemilla accumulation, even though the running sums restart.

```

> Rearranging gives us an expression for each word of the original message $m_{i+1} = z_{i} - 2^k \cdot z_{i + 1}$, which we can look up in the table.

Reviewer: Note that the indexing here (using m<sub>i+1</sub>) is now consistent with the indexing above, when it wasn't before.

$$
\begin{array}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|}
\hline

> \text{Step} &    x_A    &     bits  &    \lambda_1    &   \lambda_2     &    x_P       & q_{Sinsemilla1}& q_{Sinsemilla2} & table_{idx}&    table_x     &    table_y      \\\hline
>     1       & x_Q       &   z_0     & \lambda_{1,1}   & \lambda_{2,1}   & x_{P[m_1]}   & 1              & 1               &     0      & x_{P[0]}       & y_{P[0]}        \\\hline
>     2       & x_{A,2}   &   z_1     & \lambda_{1,2}   & \lambda_{2,2}   & x_{P[m_2]}   & 1              & 1               &     1      & x_{P[1]}       & y_{P[1]}        \\\hline
>     3       & x_{A,3}   &   z_2     & \lambda_{1,3}   & \lambda_{2,3}   & x_{P[m_3]}   & 1              & 1               &     2      & x_{P[2]}       & y_{P[2]}        \\\hline
>   \vdots    & \vdots    &   \vdots  & \vdots          & \vdots          & \vdots       & 1              & 1               &   \vdots   & \vdots         & \vdots          \\\hline
>     n       & x_{A,n}   &   z_{n-1} & \lambda_{1,n}   & \lambda_{2,n}   & x_{P[m_{n}]} & 1              & 0               &   \vdots   & \vdots         & \vdots          \\\hline
>             & x_{A,n+1} &   z_n     &                 &                 &              &                &                 &   \vdots   & \vdots         & \vdots          \\\hline
>   \vdots    &           &           &                 &                 &              &                &                 &  2^k - 1   & x_{P[2^k - 1]} & y_{P[2^k - 1]}  \\\hline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\text{Step} &    x_A    &     bits  &    \lambda_1    &   \lambda_2     &    x_P       & q_{Sinsemilla1}& q_{Sinsemilla2} & table_{idx}&    table_x     &    table_y      \\\hline
    0       & x_Q       &   z_0     & \lambda_{1,0}   & \lambda_{2,0}   & x_{P[m_1]}   & 1              & 1               &     0      & x_{P[0]}       & y_{P[0]}        \\\hline
    1       & x_{A,1}   &   z_1     & \lambda_{1,1}   & \lambda_{2,1}   & x_{P[m_2]}   & 1              & 1               &     1      & x_{P[1]}       & y_{P[1]}        \\\hline
    2       & x_{A,2}   &   z_2     & \lambda_{1,2}   & \lambda_{2,2}   & x_{P[m_3]}   & 1              & 1               &     2      & x_{P[2]}       & y_{P[2]}        \\\hline
  \vdots    & \vdots    &   \vdots  & \vdots          & \vdots          & \vdots       & 1              & 1               &   \vdots   & \vdots         & \vdots          \\\hline
   n-1      & x_{A,n-1} &   z_{n-1} & \lambda_{1,n-1} & \lambda_{2,n-1} & x_{P[m_{n}]} & 1              & 0               &   \vdots   & \vdots         & \vdots          \\\hline
    n       & x_{A,n}   &   z_n     &                 &                 &              &                &                 &   \vdots   & \vdots         & \vdots          \\\hline
  \vdots    &           &           &                 &                 &              &                &                 &  2^k - 1   & x_{P[2^k - 1]} & y_{P[2^k - 1]}  \\\hline
```

\end{array}
$$

### Specification of Sinsemilla gate:
$$
\begin{array}{|c|l|}
\hline
\text{Degree} & \text{Constraint} \\\hline
3   & q_{Sinsemilla,i} \cdot \left(\lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}) - y_{A,i} + y_{P,i}\right) = 0 \\\hline
4   & q_{Sinsemilla,i} \cdot \left((\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i})) - 2 y_{A,i}\right) = 0 \\\hline
3   & q_{Sinsemilla,i} \cdot \left(\lambda_{2,i}^2 - x_{A,i+1} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}) - x_{A,i}\right) = 0 \\\hline
3   & q_{Sinsemilla,i} \cdot \left(\lambda_{2,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{A,i+1}) - y_{A,i} - y_{A,i+1}\right) = 0 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

Optimized:

$$
\begin{array}{|c|l|}
\hline
\text{Degree} & \text{Constraint} \\\hline
5*  & q_{Sinsemilla1} \Rightarrow (z_{i} - 2^k \cdot z_{i+1},\, x_{P,i},\, y_{P,i} \in \mathcal{P} \\\hline
3   & q_{Sinsemilla1,i} \cdot (\lambda_{2,i}^2 - (x_{A,i+1} + (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}) + x_{A,i})) \\\hline
5   & q_{Sinsemilla2,i} \cdot \left(\lambda_{2,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{A,i+1}) - y_{A,i} - y_{A,i+1}\right) = 0 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$
where
$$

> \begin{aligned}
> y_{A,i} &= \frac{(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i})}{2},\\
> y_{A,i+1} &= \frac{(\lambda_{1,i+1} + \lambda_{2,i+1}) \cdot (x_{A,i+1} - (\lambda_{1,i+1}^2 - x_{A,i+1} - x_{P,i+1})}{2},\\
> y_{P,i} &= \frac{(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))}{2} - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i})).
> \end{aligned}

Author: ```suggestion
\begin{aligned}
y_{A,i} &= \frac{(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))}{2},\\
y_{A,i+1} &= \frac{(\lambda_{1,i+1} + \lambda_{2,i+1}) \cdot (x_{A,i+1} - (\lambda_{1,i+1}^2 - x_{A,i+1} - x_{P,i+1}))}{2},\\
y_{P,i} &= \frac{(\lambda_{1,i} + \lambda_{2,i}) \cdot (x_{A,i} - (\lambda_{1,i}^2 - x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}))}{2} - \lambda_{1,i} \cdot (x_{A,i} - x_{P,i}).
\end{aligned}
```

\end{aligned}
$$

> * The degree of a lookup gate is 2 + the degree of the polynomial expression being looked up (after tuple compression). TODO check this.

Reviewer: A blank line night be needed here for correct formatting (I forgot to add one in my suggested change).
